---
full_name: "Russian Creoles in Seldovia"
---
# RUSSIAN CREOLES in SELDOVIA

There are a lot of part-Russians in Alaska. The term for this mixed
ancestry is "**Creole**". 

Before digging deeper into the history of "Russian Creole"  we need to remember that although this group was composed predominantly of offspring of mixed-blood marriages, the Creole caegory hardly says anything about the ethnic origin of a person.  For example, Russian-Dena'ina, Dena'ina-Aleut/Sugpiaq or Russian-Aleut/Sugpiaq equally could be defined as Creoles.  In certain cases, when the situation demanded, a native could be defined as a Creole.  The Creole status defined the deree of integation of native Alaskans into the Russian Alaska social system and was equal to that of a burgher, townsman, in meropolitan Russia.  The level of education to which Creoles were entitled under the Russian regime often determined their position in the administrative sector, with Russians sometimes serving in sobordinate positions. Lydia Black, "Creoles in Russian America" Pacifica 2, no. 2 (1990): 142-155.

The term Creole comes from the Spanish word *criollo* — meaning native
to the place. In nineteenth century Kodiak, Russian entrepreneurs used
this term for individuals of both Russian and Native ancestry, an
increasingly large and segregated part of Alaska’s population. Descent
was not the only defining characteristic of the Creole class, however. A
person might also be considered Creole based on their achievements. The
Alutiiq word for Creole — *kasaakaruaq* — literally means a kind of
Russian, or not a real Russian.

Russian entrepreneurs, who needed a steady and reliable source of labor,
extended special privileges to people of mixed descent and those who
pledged political alliance to Russia. In this way, they created a
distinct class of tradesmen, managers, and leaders who were in turn
guaranteed basic civil rights. In the mid nineteenth century, Creoles
performed many of the essential administrative functions in Alaska’s
Russian American colonies. They ran schools and businesses including the
flourmill, blacksmith shop, tannery, lumberyard, and metal works. They
were also trained as priests, teachers, navigators, cartographers, and
ship commanders.

According to Russian regulations, Creole status was hereditary, passed
through men to their children. The children of a Native man were
considered Native. In contrast, the children of a Russian or Creole man
were considered Creole. Creoles had the right to an education, were
exempt from taxation and obligatory state service, and could move to
Russia at the expense of the Russian American Company after ten years of
service in America. When the US bought Alaska from Russia, the Creoles
lost much of this status as the US Government considered them as
"half-breeds" and made every attempt to "cleanse" them of all things
Russian.

In 1880 the 10th U.S. Census was published identifying, 74 natives and
Creoles as residents of Seldovia and Ostrovsky. Ostrovsky may have been
an Indian settlement on Yukon Island. No other communities were recorded
in Kachemak Bay in the 1880 Census. This census did not list individual
names, but in 1900 and into the present, many of the surnames indicate
families that are of Russian Creole descent. Creole names found among
our Seldovia Cemetery ancestors include Alexanderoff, Balashoff,
Berestoff, Kashevarof, Romanov, Saracoff, Simineof, and Sorokovikoff.
There is always some discrepancy in translation from the Russian and in
spelling in various locations and timelines.

The Kashevarov family has been used as an example of the possibility of
Creoles to succeed on a large scale. The Kashevarovs, who were the
descendants of former serf Filipp Kashevarov—a teacher at the
Novo-Arkhangel'sk school and a creóle (by some sources, Aleut)
woman-included a major-general who wrote extensively about Russian
America, a skipper, priests, and many prominent people in the colonies.
Although the Kashevarovs may have been exceptionally successful and
prolific, they are part of a larger group of creóles from high-level RAC
employees and so can-not be dismissed as an aberration. Probably the
most famous of the Kashevarovs of the first generation is Aleksandr
Fihppovich Kashevarov (1809-66). In the 1816 list, it notes that he and
his brother, Gavriil Filippovich Kashevarov are studying Russian
grammar, catechism, the foundations of mathematics, drawing, navigation
and the English language. ^^ As Roxanne Easley has noted,
Kashevarov enjoyed  a long and successful career as naval captain,
explorer, cartographer, port commander, and ultimately, head of the
Hydrographie Department of the Naval Ministry. Interestingly, during the
1830s, when he was the head of a scientific expedition to the northwest
Alaskan coast, he identified wholly with Russian and European
civilization, stating of the Inupiat, "The savage inhabitants of this
dead nature, of the dreadful kingdom of darkness and cold, have no need
for assistance from us people who have moved forward with the ages. ''
However, with the arrival of the Great Reforms, Kashevarov's writings
underwent a deep shift, as he signed himself a Creole and defended the
inhabitants of Russian America. In an 1861 article in the reformist
journal, Morskoi Sbornik, Kashevarov challenged paternalistic views of
the natives, writing:"Is it possible that we, the natives of the Russian
American territories, must forever think of the RAC's interest, which is
instilled in us from our very youth, and smother within ourselves every
inkling of natural inclination for the benefit of our native land as
citizens? Do you really think that we will always be like artless
children, as we were twenty years ago, and will not dare wish better for
ourselves? We are citizens of Russia, just like every stockholder of the
Russian American Company; we too are thinking about our progress." In a
neat reversal, Kashevarov identifies true progress with the natives, in
which group he includes himself and not with the RAC and Russian
bureaucrats.
