---
last_name: English
first_name: Susan
maiden_name: BLOCH
birth_date: 1904-02-26
birth_location: Seldovia, Alaska
death_date: 1986-10-10
death_location: Seldovia, Alaska
cemetery: Seldovia City Cemetery
cemetery_plot: 594
source_file: Cemetery Directory
---

**SUSAN *BLOCH* ENGLISH** was born February 26, 1904 in Seldovia, Alaska 
to [**Adam Bloch**](./Bloch_Adam.md) 
and [**Elizabeth BALASHOFF Bloch**](./Markle_Elizabeth_Bloch.md). 
When her mother died, Susan, at sixteen, 
was left in Seldovia with three other younger siblings to care for. They 
were taken in at some point by some relatives in Cordova that were from 
the Adam Bloch’s first marriage - the Johansson and the Simmons 
families. Susan finished high school in Cordova, and worked in 
restaurants and grocery stores to keep the family together. In 1921 she 
received a letter from Juanita Anderson, who was a teacher in Seldovia 
at the time, telling of a postmaster’s job opening in Seldovia. She 
brought the family back to Seldovia about 1923 and in 1925 got the 
official position of postmaster, which she kept for 50 years until 1975 
when she was forced to retire.

### Pioneer citizen in Seldovia Susan B. English dies at 82

**By Jan O’Meara Daily News correspondent**

Homer – Seldovia pioneer Susan B. English died Friday (October 10, 
1986)at South Peninsula Hospital in Homer. She was 82. Mrs. English, 
born, bred and wed in Seldovia, spent most of her life contributing her 
time, energy and talents to the community. She was a postmaster for 49 
years, served on a school board for 40 years and checked books out to 
generations of Seldovia residents for nearly 50 years. In 1970 the Kenai 
Peninsula Board of Education renamed the Seldovia school in her honor. 
"She will be greatly missed." Said long-time friend Elaine Giles. She 
is survived by her husband of 60 years, Jack English, a son, Art "Oscar" 
English of Anchorage, a brother, Adam Bloch of Billings, Mont., a sister 
Rika Risofff of Kenai, and five grandchildren. Mrs. English was born in 
Seldovia on Feb. 26, 1904, as was her mother. Her father, a Civil War 
veteran, was in Sitka at the time Alaska was transferred from Russian 
ownership. He came to Seldovia in 1898 as agent for the Alaska 
Commercial Company. By the time she was 16, both her parents had died, 
leaving her in charge of a brother and two sisters. Her dreams of 
becoming a school teacher ended. After a year at business school in 
Washington, she and her family moved to Cordova, where she worked two 
jobsL in a law office and for the town newspaper. It was a struggle to 
support the family and also be father and mother to children who saw her 
not as parent, but as sibling. But in 1925 she applied for and got the 
job of postmaster in Seldovia. It was to be hers for nearly 50 years. 
That same year she met Jack English. In their years together the couple 
owned and operated a store, raised a family, and were involved in 
community service. In 1927, Mrs. English went to work as a clerk for the 
Seldovia School Board and continued to serve with them for more than 40 
years. In 1936, she was instrumental in founding the Seldovia Library 
and for the next 50 years it remained an abiding passion with her. She 
collected books, did all the cataloging, wrote the grant applications 
which brought the money for a new library building, and was at the 
library nearly every day it was open – until about a year ao, when ill 
health forced her retirement, library board member Alberta Willard 
recalled. For many new arrivals over the years, Susan English "was the 
first smiling face you saw," Willard recalled. Generations of children 
grew up knowing that if they were late wih their library books, it was 
OK, Mrs. English would forgive them their fines. In a 1982 interview she 
said, "I think a community is an extension of your family." Memorial 
services will be held in Seldovia this week.


### Susan English: ‘An extension of your family’ (an interview) - 1982

Susan English is as much a part of Seldovia as the rocky tidal cove that 
protrudes through the Kachemak Bay fishing community. The school is 
named for her, the library was founded by her, and four generations of 
Seldovians have been related to her. 

She was born there in 1904 and has lived there most of her life. But her 
sense of belonging comes from involvement, not endurance. She was 
postmaster for 49 years, active with the school board and local health 
boards for some 40 years, and a volunteer in nearly every community 
project for five decades. She has an old-fashioned sense of community 
commitment tht seems almost an anachronism today, but which has served 
Seldovia for Susan English’s entire life.

#### Could you tell me about some of your involvements in the community?

It seems like everything Seldovia was involved with had my name there 
someplace. The tiing that I believe in the most was the library, the 
Seldovia Public Library. It has been the center of my love. We organized 
the library in 1936. A lot of our projects, Seldovia had to do on its 
own. We didn’t have the government grants then that we do today. I think 
volunteerism was important in the development of our library. All 
through the years, o one was ever paid for their services at the library 
or any other community project. Even today, I still volunteer at the 
library. People tell me that I am too old and library work is too 
demanding. But I just enjoy it so much. I love the books, I love to get 
over there and do my own thing. It is a place for everyone. You are 
never too old or too young for the library. The library and the room you 
go into, the room full of books, is the most wonderful world you can 
enter, no matter what you may be interested in. We have just ordinary 
fiction and all the classics that tell how it used to be way back when. 
We have books today that you don’t have to go through pages and pages of 
description; you can look at them and see them visually.

#### What are your favorite books, your favorite parts of the library?

All of the classics. I love biographies telling about people’s lives and 
all the things people did. Just think of all the old books by all those 
wonderful writers. Authors that point you in the right direction and 
have pleasant thoughts and dreams, happy thoughts about life. I don’t 
like these horror stories today; they are painful. Before we had TV 
Seldovia was very interested in the library. People take too many things 
for granted; I think the community should take a lot of interest in 
their library, more than they do.

#### The concept of giving and volunteering seems important to you.

Yes. I think about all those grants the city gets now and how everyone 
wants to be paid for their service to the community. I suppose they 
can’t be blames; it is just different. In the early days we didn’t 
have any of these grants and everyone had to learn to work together; the 
whole community worked together. You learned to know each other. If you 
were working together you became acquainted, you became a part of the 
community. I feel sometimes like I am old fashioned and inadequate 
trying to express myself and the way I feel. I guess there are certain 
values that are basic human values; these will never change.

#### You were born here in Seldovia. Was your entire family active in the community?

Yes. I was born here in 1907 and my mother was also born here. My father 
and mother both taught us about giving to the community. It was 
expected. My father was the commercial agent for Alaska Commercial 
Company. He did everything around the community; he was father, mother 
and doctor to many. He helped deliver babies and all that. I remember my 
mother acting as a nurse a lot. My sister and I would go through the 
village with her just like mini-public health nurses. We always had to 
consider our fellow man and we had to do our own part in the world 
because it was not here for our own selfish needs and such.

#### How did your father get to Seldovia?

He came to Alaska as a Civil War veteran. He was in Sitka at the time of 
the transfer from Russia. He came to Seldovia with Alaska Commercial 
Company in the late 1800s. After the AC Company he went into his own 
mercantile store business and was postmaster. Mother she was younger 
than he by a lot; they married (his second) when she was only 16. She 
was a wonderful wife and mother. So you see, with my family being 
involved with health, with the store, with the mail, they were active 
alright. Dad was also involved with the schools. That had something to 
do with my desire to be a teacher. I never made it though.

#### What prevented you?

My dad died when I was 11 and my mom died when I was 16. I had a brother 
and two sisters, so I more or less had to help keep the family together. 
I wasn’t able to go on to be a teacher. I did manage to get in a year at 
a business school in Washington. When I came back, my sister and I and 
the children, we rented a place in Cordova. I went to work part time for 
rank Foster, an attorney, and also worked for Kelly Robinson, who was 
editor of the Cordova Times. That was in 1923. I had my brother and 
younger sister then and we were finding it a little bit difficult trying 
to keep on an even keel. I was trying to be a mother and father to 
youngsters who didn’t like me disciplining them. Then a letter came from 
Seldovia saying the postmaster’s job was opening and why didn’t I apply, 
after all, my father had served as postmaster for years. I thought it 
over and talked it over with my siblings. My sister said, "Yes, Susan, I 
think it will be much easier on all of us. I think you would make a good 
postmaster." I said I didn’t know, but the circumstances were such that 
I thought it would be the best thing for the family. If we were going to 
be together and stay together – there were people urging me to put the 
kids in an orphanage – then I had to do the practical thing. Ever since 
mother died all of the responsibilities of motherhood were on me. There 
were limited funds from Dad’s estate, that helped with education. 
Anyways, being practical and conservative I chose to return to Seldovia 
in 1925. I received an appointment in June of 1925. That is when I met 
and married Jack; we were married in 1926.

#### How did you and Jack meet?

He came to Seldovia in 1923 to work for Snug Harbor Packing Company. He 
stayed and trapped in the winter. I was working in a restaurant waiting 
for my appointment as postmaster to come through. The only services they 
had in those days were the Admiral Lines, and they had Alaska Steamship 
Lines. But this one morning the boat brought in lots of passengers. The 
man I was working with didn’t show up to help me, so there I was all by 
myself, opening up the restaurant and trying to do everything. I was 
really pressed for time; in those days we had pole stoves to do our 
cooking on. Anyway, there was this nice young fella waiting her at this 
counter. I think I had 20 other people; he was asking me if I was alone 
her at the counter. It was about 7:30 a.m. I finally reached him and he 
ordered his ham and eggs over-easy. I still remember. I took care of him 
and he stayed and that’s how we became acquainted. We were married a 
year later.

#### How did you manage to handle the children and everything else at age 16?

I had wonderful friends. I had this strong feeling the family should 
stay together. I believe that I am an unselfish person; I never put 
myself first. I was really full of ideals. I haven’t lost sight of the 
and I believe in my thinking, the positive thinking I use. My faith and 
knowing that there is a force of God, or whatever you want to name it, 
to hold on to. I believe that a woman can be a mother and still be her 
own person. I think people worry too much about all that today. You must 
do your own thing first, you must be true to yourself. We all have a 
responsibility in this old world. The main thing in life is to be caring 
and to care for people no matter if the people around you respond. That 
is why I send birthday cards every year. My mom and dad taught it to me, 
it makes people feel good. You do it for others, because you care about 
people. I literally send hundreds of cards a year.

#### How did you manage to balance out all your activities as you became wife, mother, postmaster, owner of a store, librarian?

Jack, when he was around, was very supportive. We always contributed 
together to the community. At first, when Jack and I were married, he 
wanted me to give up the postmaster job. You know how men were in those 
days. But we put the post office in our home. I’m a night person and 
Jack was always helping me with the children. When I went to a meeting, 
I was always doing something; he would help.

I guess it is that I feel that I am part of Seldovia. You know, my roots 
are here; my mother was born here, I was born here, my children and 
grandchildren, with the exception of one, were born here. That is four 
generations of us in Seldovia. It gives you a feeling of being a part of 
something, of being close. You know, living in a small community forces 
you to grow. I was the postmaster for 49 years. In dealing with the 
public, you know, they can be irritating and demanding. But people are 
God’s children. Who am I to demand approval or judge others: No matter 
who you meet or who you are, if you sit down and visit with them, and 
get to know them, you find out that they really have so much to give. If 
you didn’t make an effort, you may never know that person for their true 
self. I have always been in contact with people this way, behind the 
scenes, so to speak. After all, without the action of reaching out, what 
good are words?

#### Anything else on your philosophy of involvement?

Yes. I think the community is an extension of your family. If you want 
to be involved in making a place better for your family, get involved. 
It makes me very happy when someone visits our community and expresses 
joy at what they find here. You want to be proud of your home and happy 
in your home; you want it to be the best place for your family. You have 
in your home an extension of the community. And you have in the 
community, an extension of your home. It is like an eternal extension; 
the basis of your participation and your home in the community is the 
foundation for our borough, for our state, for our whole country. 
Everything has to start in your home. If we are going to have the right 
kind of community, you have to take part. You don’t have to go into 
regular politics to do so. All sorts of things bring good into the 
community, like your schools, your church, and of course, your library. 
It is the only way you become acquainted and feel a part of the place. 
With involvement, you learn to love the people in the community and love 
the community as a whole.

