---
last_name: Hern
first_name: Frank
birth_date: 1927-04-25
birth_location: Santa Cruz, California
death_date: 1966-04-28
death_location: Aishihik, Yukon Territories, Canada
cemetery: Seldovia City Cemetery
cemetery_plot: 96
source_file: Cemetery Directory
---
**FRANK LYN HERN** was born on April 25, 1926 in Santa Cruz, California
to Royal Franklin and Ruby Alice (Powell) Hern. He attended Mission Hill
school and later moved with his family to Seattle where he continued his
schooling. Later his family returned to Santa Cruz.

In his mid-teens, Frank joined the United States Army Transport Service as a merchant mariner. ATS operated Army transport ships for both troop transport and cargo service between United States ports and overseas posts. He was present when Dutch Harbor was bombed, being only 16 at the time. While with the
ATS Hern's travels included Kiska, Hawaii and Attu.

He enlisted in the army air corps in December, 1943, before he was 18,
although he was not called until June of the following year. He received
most of his training in Texas, first at Amarillo, then Scott's field and
finally Harlingen field from which he was graduated November 16, 1944,
as a tail gunner on a B-24. Following a leave at Christmas, Hern was
transferred to Walla Walla, Wash., army air field where he completed his
final training aboard the Liberator.

![](../assets/images/FRANK%20LYN%20HERN/media/image1.jpeg)

By 1966, Frank was living in Seldovia, and working as a bush pilot of
Cook Inlet Aviation. In the intervening years he raced hydroplanes,
motorcycles and sports cars and was a certified aviation ground school
instructor.

His final adventure was to be an attempt at setting a new world record
in light plane straight line distance flight. He planned to fly, non-stop, at least
3,600 miles in his Cessna 150 from Fairbanks Alaska to Tallahassee,
Florida, to crack the existing 2,647-mile record in the 1,102 to
2,204-pound weight category set in 1956 by a Czechoslovakian.

Frank picked up his brand new 1966 Model 150 Commuter at the Cessna
Aircraft Company in Wichita, Kansas on March 14 and immediately began
preparations for the April flight. He intended to paint the "City of
Seldovia, Alaska," on the 150's fuselage and place a replica of the
Alaska flag on the vertical tail fin of the plane.

Sadly, on April 28, 1966, Frank Hern crashed and was killed early in the
record flight near Aishihik, Yukon Territory, Canada. The cause of the
crash was listed as a Stall by investigators, due to the airplane being
overloaded.

The area was so remote that the wreckage was not found until 5 months
after the crash. With 20/20 hindsight, we can speculate that Hern likely
got trapped in a mountain pass, and was unable to climb because the
airplane was loaded 700-800 pounds over gross weight. It is ironic and
sad to read in the press release that "Hern's bush-pilot knowledge of
the 8,000 to 10,000 peaks of the Canadian Rockies is to his advantage in
that he can choose either to climb over the peaks or fly through their
passes."

### Alaskan Bush Pilot Plans Non-stop Distance Record in a Cessna 150

Source: Cessna News March 23, 1966

WICHITA, KANSAS--An Alaskan bush pilot, 39-year-old Frank Hern of
Seldovia, Alaska, is in Wichita to complete preparations for an April
attempt at a world's light plane straight line distance record in his
new Cessna 150.

Hern plans to fly at least 3,600 miles in his small two-seat aircraft to
crack the existing 2,647-mile record in the 1,102 to 2,204-pound weight
category set in 1956 by a Czechoslovakian. The record was established by
Frantisek Novah in a Sokal model in a flight from Brno, Czechoslovakia
to Kulunda, Russia.

The nonstop flight planned by Hern is to start at Fairbanks, Alaska,
cross the Canadian Rockies and continue on southeast towards
Tallahassee, Florida.

Hern's flight already has been sanctioned by the National Aeronautic
Association in Washington, D. C., which operates under the auspices of
the Federation Aeronautique Internationale. This is the international
organization responsible for checking and verifying all official
aviation record claims. For the next 90 days, beginning March 21, Hern
will be the only person allowed this sanction for a straight line
distance hop in that weight category.

The Alaskan picked up his 1966 Model 150 Commuter at the Cessna Aircraft
Company on March 14 and immediately began preparations for the April
flight. The Javelin Aircraft Company in Wichita, specializing in
manufacture of special aircraft fuel systems, is installing a 125-gallon
fuel tank in the fuselage. Together with the aircraft's auxiliary long
range wing tanks, total useable fuel will be approximately 160 gallons.

The Cessna 150 has a 100 horsepower Continental engine and cruises at
120 mph. On climb-out, the aircraft has the capability to ascend at 670
feet per minute and has a service ceiling of 12,650 feet.

Hern says he intends to paint the "City of Seldovia, Alaska," on the
150's fuselage and place a replica of the Alaska flag on the vertical
tail fin of the plane.

According to the bush pilot, planning stages of the venture has been in
the works for months and he has "set up many a night" examining flight
charts. Hern, now on a leave of absence from Cook Inlet Aviation
Company, said he decided on a Cessna 150 for the task and placed his
order with Cessna in early January.

A 10,000 hour and 20-year pilot, Hern has a commercial license with
multi-engine, land, sea, instructor and instrument instructor ratings in
addition to a ground school instructor rating.

The record attempt will be made on an IFR flight plan and will start
when advantageous weather exists along the proposed flight route. The
flight is expected to last in excess of 30 hours with a fair amount of
those hours occurring at night. Hern's bush-pilot knowledge of the 8,000
to 10,000 peaks of the Canadian Rockies is to his advantage in that he
can choose either to climb over the peaks or fly through their passes.

Nourishment during the flight will consist of a high protein chocolate
drink, water, and malted milk tablets.

**\[Winnipeg Free Press Newspaper Archives, May 2, 1966, p.3\]**![](../assets/images/FRANK%20LYN%20HERN/media/image2.jpeg)

**Fairbanks News Miner**: Sept. 26, 1966 - Wreckage believed to be that
of a plane piloted by long-distance flier Frank Hern, of Seldovia,
missing since April 28 on a flight from Fairbanks, has been spotted near
Aishihik, Y.T. Hawley W. Evans, owners of Fairbanks Air Service, and
John Jensen of Tok, first spotted the wreckage yesterday as they were
returning from the states with a new plane. "We were flying between
Burwash and Aishihik, at about 10,000 feet, above the clouds. My
co-pilot had a hole on his side, and looked down and saw the plane"
Evans said. "It was in a blind canyon along one of the creeeks going
into Talbot Creek, east of BUrwash Landing" he said. Evans said he and
Jensen didn’t realize the wreckage might be the missiong Hern plane, but
when he radioed to Floyd Miller, Northway customs officer who has been
independently searching for Hern all summer, Miller alerted the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police. An RCMP spokesman haid a chartered helicopter
left at 8 am tody for the site of the wreckage. He said the helicopter
team might have to land some distance from the wreckage and walk in.
Jensen, who alerted the News-Miner and Miller returned to the wreckage
scene last night. Jense

[**Aviation Safety Network**](https://aviation-safety.net/wikibase/wiki.php?id=5932):

  Date: 28-APR-1966
  Time: 19:41
  Type: Silhouette image of generic C150 model; specific model in this crash may look slightly different Cessna 150F
  Owner/operator: Private
  Registration: N6934F
  C/n / msn: 150-63564
  Fatalities: Fatalities: 1 / Occupants: 1
  Other fatalities: 0
  Aircraft damage: Substantial
  Category: Accident
  Location: near Aishihik,Yukon Territories - Canada
  Phase: En route
  Nature: Private
  Departure airport: Fairbanks, Alaska, USA
  Destination airport: Tallahassee, Florida, USA

Narrative:

On April 28, 1966, Frank Hern crashed and was killed early in the record
flight near Aishihik, Yukon Territory, Canada. The cause of the crash
was listed as a Stall by investigators, due to the airplane being
overloaded. The area was so remote that the wreckage was not found until
5 months after the crash.

With 20/20 hindsight, we can speculate that Hern likely got trapped in a
mountain pass, and was unable to climb because the airplane was loaded
700-800 pounds over gross weight. It is ironic and sad to read in the
press release that "Hern's bush-pilot knowledge of the 8,000 to 10,000
peaks of the Canadian Rockies is to his advantage in that he can choose
either to climb over the peaks or fly through their passes."

The accident occurred at approximately 7:40 pm which in April would have
been near total darkness. Why would Frank Hern choose to fly in the most
mountainous part of his flight in darkness? In 1966 that part of the
world had little in the way of navigational aids. Despite his bush-pilot
experience, it appears Frank Hern fell victim to miscalculation and
overconfidence.

***Road & Track*** Magazine November 1953:

"A strange assortment of cars lined up for the feature of the day." The
author was Bill Brant and the feature race noted was the Seafair Trophy
at the inaugural Seafair Sports Car Races held on Saturday August 8,
1953 at Paine Air Force Base in Everett, Washington. Not only was the
assortment of cars "strange," this was a race weekend that almost didn’t
happen. Apparently the

Seafair Committee did not initially understand the level of interest in
sports car racing at this time. However, with considerable prodding from
the Northwestern Region of the SCCA, the Puget Sound Sports Car Club,
the Air Force and the Seafair Celebration, the race was not only
approved, but was scheduled in conjunction with the following day’s
unlimited hydroplane "Gold Cup" race on Lake Washington. It turned out
that the sports car guys were right as spectators arrived in
droves...25,000 of them\!

The 48-lap, 100-mile feature race was contested by an assortment of 11
strange and wonderful automobiles driven by soon-to-be racing legends
and some forever-unknowns. Bill Stroppe and his mighty Mercury-milled
Kurtis was the overall race winner that day. Bill Pollack finished
2<sup>nd</sup> in a C-Type Jaguar, followed by ***Frank Hern*** in a
modified Jag and Pete Lovely in a Porsche Super.

