---
full_name: "Waterbury Family"

---
# WATERBURY Family

\_\_\_\_\_

The Waterbury family line in Seldovia begins with Russell Seville, Sr.

**Russell Waterbury, Sr.** was born October 6, 1885 in Minnesota. His
father, Thomas, was from Canada and his mother, Zulina, from New York.
He lived in Wrangell in 1917 when he registered for the US Military
draft in WWI. He listed his occupation as Marine Fireman, and he worked
on the US Osprey for the Bureau of Fisheries. In 1930 he and his wife
Marie, also from Minnesota were living in Seldovia and he was a
fisherman. Marie died between 1934 and 1938. On September 3 1938 Russell
married Anna Sorokovikoff in Seldovia. He adopted her daughter Marion,
who took Waterbury as her last name. At the time of registration for the
WWII draft (age 56) Russell was still in Seldovia. He died October 1965
in Seldovia.

**Anna Sorokovikoff Waterbury** was the 3<sup>rd</sup> wife of Russell
Waterbury. They married September 3, 1938 in Seldovia. She was born
February 24, 1910 in Ninilchik to **Konstantine** and **Anna Berestov
Sorokovikoff.** Anna died November 19, 2004 in Seldovia.

**George Waterbury** was the son of Russell Waterbury, Sr and his first
wife, Marie. He was born in Seldovia on June 29, 1934. He died in
Seldovia May 21, 1996

**Marion WATERBURY Collier** was born April 18, 1936, in Seldovia,
Alaska. She married Louis Collier . They built, owned and operated "The
Centurion", a restaurant on Seldovia’s Main Street.

**Axenia Lulu QUIJANCE Waterbury,** born 1953 in Seattle, Washington,
was daughter of **Alfred** and **Margaret Shugak Quijance** and the wife
of Raymond Leo Waterbury, daughter-in-law of Russell and Anna Waterbury.
She died in Seldovia on January 1, 1975.
